I HAD MY APPENDIX OUT
WHEN I WAS TEN
AND I REMEMBER THAT
THEY GAVE YOU ETHER THEN
AND I REMEMBER THE FEELING
OF FLOATING OFF UNDER THE ETHER
AND I LOVED THAT FEELING.
IT WAS JUST LIKE BEING
LIFTED OUT OF MY MIND
IN A VERY NICE WAY
BECAUSE MY MIND
WASN'T A VERY GOOD
NEIGHBORHOOD FOR ME TO BE IN.
I WASN'T VERY SAFE THERE.
YOU KNOW, THE SCENARIO
IS THAT YOU START SMOKING POT,
DRINKING BEER
THEN YOU GO TO THE HARD DRUGS.
I WENT STRAIGHT
TO A SPIKE IN MY ARM.
I AM THE KIND OF PERSON
WHO WANTS TO JUST DO IT
AND DO IT AND DO IT AND DO IT.
YOU KNOW... "HIS EYES ARE BIGGER
THAN HIS STOMACH" SORT OF THING.
YOU KNOW, I COULDN'T
POSSIBLY BE ADDICTED TO DRUGS.
I WAS A POLICE OFFICER
DOING MY JOB.
I WAS USING TWO,
THREE TIMES A WEEK
THEN EVERY EVENING,
AND THEN ALL WEEKEND LONG.
IN FACT, OF A GROUP OF
ABOUT 40 OF US LIVELY, ROBUST
HEALTHY, INTELLIGENT,
BEAUTIFUL YOUNGSTERS
I THINK I'M PROBABLY
THE LAST ONE ALIVE.
[Captioning sponsored
by PUBLIC AFFAIRS TELEVISION]
FUNDING FOR THIS SERIES
IS PROVIDED BY:
MAKING GRANTS TO IMPROVE
THE HEALTH AND HEALTH CARE
OF ALL AMERICANS.
AND BY:
BUILDING AMERICA'S FUTURE
THROUGH PENSION
AND RETIREMENT PLANS
ENCOURAGING DIALOGUE
AND DISCUSSION.
I'M BILL MOYERS.
HARDLY A FAMILY HAS BEEN SPARED
DIRECT OR INDIRECT EXPERIENCE
WITH ADDICTION
INCLUDING MY OWN.
MY WIFE JUDITH AND I THOUGHT
WE KNEW ABOUT ADDICTION
UNTIL IT CAME CLOSE TO HOME.
THEN WE DISCOVERED
JUST HOW NAIVE WE HAD BEEN.
TEN YEARS AGO,
OUR OLDEST SON PLUNGED INTO
A LONG AND PAINFUL STRUGGLE
WITH DRUGS AND ALCOHOL.
OUR ENTIRE FAMILY WAS
SWEPT INTO THE ORDEAL.
IT'S COME TO A HAPPY PLACE
FOR US, FORTUNATELY
AND OUR SON IS DOING WELL.
MANY OTHERS ARE NOT SO LUCKY.
WHAT WE HAVE LEARNED
FROM OUR EXPERIENCE
AND ARE STILL LEARNING
PROMPTED THIS SERIES.
IT'S NOT ABOUT THE USE
OR EVEN THE OCCASIONAL ABUSE
OF A SUBSTANCE.
WE'RE TALKING
ABOUT THAT OBSESSIVE DESIRE
WHERE A CHEMICAL
YOU TAKE, DRINK OR SMOKE
BECOMES THE MASTER OF YOUR MIND
AND THE TYRANT OF YOUR LIFE.
THAT'S WHAT WE'LL BE REPORTING:
THE EXPERIENCE OF ADDICTION,
HOW IT HAPPENS
AND WHAT CAN BE DONE ABOUT IT.
Woman:
OKAY, DENISE, NOW YOU'RE
GOING TO HEAR THE BEEP
FOR ABOUT TWO MINUTES.
Moyers:
SCIENTISTS WILL SHOW US
HOW DRUGS HIJACK THE BRAIN.
Man:
LITERALLY,
WHAT THIS ALLOWS US TO DO
IS GET AN IMAGE OF DESIRE
IN THE BRAIN.
Man:
NICE-LOOKING BRAIN.
Woman:
I TELL THE GIRLS ALL THE TIME
THAT IF YOU FORGET
YOUR LAST HIGH
THEN YOU'RE GOING TO USE AGAIN.
HI, I'M LASHANNA,
I'M AN ADDICT.
Moyers:
WE'LL GO TO PLACES
WHERE PEOPLE ARE WORKING
TO BREAK FREE FROM ADDICTION.
AND THE NEW FRIENDS I MET--
THE BEST FRIENDS I EVER HAD.
THEY CLEAN.
( laughter )
Moyers:
WE'LL TALK TO KIDS
IN DANGER OF BECOMING
THE NEXT GENERATION OF ADDICTS.
I MEAN,
THEY JUST KIND OF TOLD ME
"JOE, YOU'RE AN ADDICT,
LOOK AT YOU."
I SAID, "WHY? HOW?
BECAUSE WHAT?
BECAUSE I HANG OUT
WITH MY FRIENDS AND DO DRUGS?"
Woman:
THIS WHOLE JAIL IS MAINLY FILLED
WITH PEOPLE WITH DRUG PROBLEMS.
THEY STEAL FOR DRUGS,
THEY HAVE SEX FOR DRUGS.
IT'S ALL FOR THE DOPE.
Moyers:
AND WE'LL REPORT ON THE FIGHT TO
CHANGE OUR NATIONAL DRUG POLICY.
Woman:
THE BOTTOM LINE IS
THAT WE WOULD RATHER HAVE
THAT BED SPACE USED
BY A RAPIST,
A ROBBER OR A MURDERER
THAN SOMEONE WHO HAS
AN ABUSIVE SUBSTANCE PROBLEM.
LET'S BEGIN
WITH SOME REAL VETERANS--
PEOPLE WHO SPEAK
FROM PERSONAL EXPERIENCE.
THEY'VE AGREED
TO TELL US THEIR STORIES
SO WE COULD BRING YOU
THIS "PORTRAIT OF ADDICTION."
Man:
I REMEMBER IT ALMOST
AS IF IT WAS TODAY.
A FRIEND OF MINE
WHO HAD ALREADY BEEN USING
TOOK ME UP TO THE ROOF,
AND I THOUGHT IT WAS FOR POT--
UH, MARIJUANA--
AND WE WENT UP THERE
AND HE HAD ALREADY USED HEROIN.
HE WAS USING IT INTRAMUSCULAR
AND SKIN-POPPED IT
AND THEN OFFERED ME SOME.
AND THERE WAS THIS...
AS SOON AS I INJECTED IT--
OR HE INJECTED IT FOR ME;
IN THOSE EARLY DAYS
I HAD A NEEDLE PHOBIA--
I REMEMBER THIS WARMTH,
THIS SERENITY.
MY FATHER DEALT WITH
THE FAMILY BY DRINKING.
HE... I REMEMBER VERY WELL,
HE'D GET A BIG BOTTLE OF ALMADEN
AND KICK BACK IN FRONT OF THE TV
AND DRINK... DRINK HIS WINE.
AND AROUND THE TIME I WAS 19
I TOOK A SEMESTER OFF
FROM SCHOOL
AND I WAS WORKING
AND COMING HOME WITH THE FAMILY
AND I DISCOVERED ALCOHOL
WAS A VERY, VERY EFFICIENT WAY
OF DEALING WITH THE FAMILY.
AND IT WORKED FOR A WHILE, IT...
YOU KNOW, JUST GET A BUZZ ON
AND EVERYTHING'S FINE,
EVERYTHING'S FINE.
IT WAS ON MY FIRST DATE.
I WENT OUT TO A PLACE CALLED
THE AUDUBON BALLROOM.
THERE WAS A BIG DANCE THERE
AND I REMEMBER IT WAS A BOTTLE
OF SEAGRAM'S 7 OR SOMETHING.
SO, UM, I GOT VERY SICK.
AND EVEN THAT NIGHT,
MY FIRST TIME DRINKING
I WAS ABLE TO HOLD
A LOT OF ALCOHOL.
YOU KNOW, I DIDN'T DRINK
IN HIGH SCHOOL, COLLEGE.
I HAD NO UPROARIOUS
STORIES THERE.
I GOT... I STARTED
AFTER I GOT MARRIED
AND I MOVED TO ANOTHER COMMUNITY
AND I DIDN'T KNOW PEOPLE
AND WHEN I WENT OUT SOCIALLY,
I WAS VERY SHY.
BUT I LEARNED IF I HAD A FEW
DRINKS, IT WOULD LOOSEN ME UP.
I FELT... I FELT AS GOOD
AS EVERYBODY ELSE THERE.
I CAME HOME FROM TWO YEARS
IN THE ARMED FORCES AND...
Moyers:
VIETNAM?
YEAH...
AND, UM, I HAD AVOIDED
ANY SERIOUS DRUG USE THERE
BUT WHEN I CAME HOME,
I WAS LIVING IN HARLEM.
ALMOST EVERYONE I KNEW
WAS INVOLVED
WITH SOME KIND OF DRUGS,
BUT PRINCIPALLY HEROIN
WHICH WAS SOMETHING
THAT HAD BEEN A TABOO FOR US
SINCE THE TIME THAT I WAS SMALL.
WE... WE SORT
OF GREW UP WITH THAT
BEING A THING THAT WAS FULL OF
MYSTERY, BUT CERTAINLY BAD.
I'D BEEN VERY TERRIFIED OF
THE NOTION OF ANY KIND OF DRUG.
I KIND OF THOUGHT I MIGHT HAVE
TO DO THEM AT SOME POINT
BECAUSE I REMEMBER
DRUG EDUCATION TELLING ME
THAT PEER PRESSURE IS GOING
TO PUSH YOU INTO DOING DRUGS
AND I KNEW THAT IF THIS WAS SO
THEN ANYBODY WHO DOESN'T DO
DRUGS MUST BE A TOTAL GEEK
AND SINCE I'M A TOTAL GEEK
AND I WANT TO GET OUT
OF BEING A TOTAL GEEK
I'D BETTER DO
WHAT PEER PRESSURE SAYS.
SO THAT DRUG EDUCATION
WAS NOT PARTICULARLY EFFECTIVE.
BUT I DO REMEMBER
ONE SORT OF PRINCIPLE
THAT CAME OUT
OF THAT DRUG EDUCATION WAS
I REMEMBER THEY TAUGHT ME ABOUT
TOBACCO, AND IT CAUSED CANCER
AND IT WAS REALLY,
REALLY BAD FOR YOU
AND IT DIDN'T EVEN SEEM
TO GET YOU PARTICULARLY HIGH
AND I THOUGHT,
"NAH, I WON'T DO THAT ONE."
BUT I REMEMBER "ALCOHOL MAKES
YOU PHYSICALLY OUT OF CONTROL.
"I DON'T LIKE THAT ONE.
MARIJUANA--
THAT SOUNDS INTERESTING."
I STARTED USING AS A RESULT
OF WORKING UNDERCOVER NARCOTICS
ON THE STREET LEVEL.
I WOULD GO INTO A TOWN
WITH AN ASSUMED IDENTITY
RENT AN APARTMENT AND BUY DRUGS
FOR A PERIOD OF 60 DAYS
OR 90 DAYS.
IT SOMETIMES STRETCHED
INTO SEVERAL MONTHS.
Moyers:
DO YOU REMEMBER
THE FIRST TIME YOU USED?
I WAS... I HAD A NEIGHBOR
WHO WAS SELLING
AND I HAD DISCOVERED THIS
OVER THE COURSE
OF BECOMING FRIENDLY WITH HIM
AND WENT IN WITH A STATE AGENT.
HE SAID, "JUST DO LIKE I DO,
DO... DO EXACTLY AS I DO."
AND THE COCAINE WAS LAID OUT
ON THE MIRROR
AND... AND HE SNORTED IT
AND HANDED ME, I THINK IT WAS
A ROLLED-UP $100 BILL
AND I SNORTED IT, AND I LIKED IT
THE FIRST TIME I DID IT.
WE WERE ALL OUT IN SUBURBIA,
IN VERY FINE HOMES
AND HAVING VERY GOOD DINNERS
AND VERY GOOD WINE
AND THEN IT WAS KIND OF CHIC
TO BRING OUT THE COKE AFTER
AND THEY'D PUT IT ON A MIRROR
OR A PIECE OF GLASS
AND BREAK IT UP
AND BREAK UP THE LINES.
AND WE'D BE TALKING
ABOUT ONE THING OR ANOTHER--
NEVER ABOUT DRUGS, OF COURSE
ALWAYS MAYBE ABOUT POLITICS
OR SOMETHING LIKE THAT--
AND IN THE MIDST
OF OUR CONVERSATION
WE WOULD BE DOING THIS.
AND EVERYBODY FELT VERY IN
AND VERY WITH IT
AND VERY, YOU KNOW, TOGETHER.
I STARTED CUTTING CLASSES--
WHICH WAS SOMETHING
THAT I NEVER DID
BECAUSE I ENJOYED MY CLASSES--
AND HANGING OUT
IN THE BATHROOMS
AND DRINKING
WILD IRISH ROSE, YOU KNOW.
AND AT FIRST,
IT WAS ON A RARE BASIS
AND THEN IT BECAME
ALMOST A DAILY THING
THAT YOU START
LOOKING FORWARD TO.
I HAD TRIED COCAINE FOR THE
FIRST TIME, WHEN I WAS ABOUT 17
AND I REALLY LIKED
THE FEELING OF POWER AND GLAMOUR
AND SEXINESS IT GAVE ME.
AND MY BOYFRIEND SUGGESTED
"WELL, GEE, YOU'RE GOING
TO THIS IVY LEAGUE SCHOOL
"THAT'LL BE A GREAT MARKET.
THERE'S LOTS OF PEOPLE
WITH LOTS OF MONEY THERE."
AND WHEN I GOT THERE,
I WAS SO INTIMIDATED
BY ALL THOSE PEOPLE
WITH ALL THAT MONEY.
I FELT SO LEFT OUT AND
SO SCARED OF THEM AND SO POOR.
I JUST FELT LIKE, "WELL, GEE
"HERE'S THIS GREAT SOURCE
OF LOTS OF MONEY.
"IT'LL GIVE ME FRIENDS,
IT'LL GIVE ME DRUGS
IT'LL IMPROVE MY SOCIAL LIFE,
PEOPLE WILL WANT ME."
FRIENDS THAT I GREW UP WITH
PEOPLE THAT I WAS YOUNG WITH
WERE ALL USING DRUGS
AND I EITHER FOUND IT OUT
RIGHT AWAY
OR OVER TIME IT BECAME CLEAR.
THEY WERE USING HEROIN,
AND, IN FACT, THE...
IN SOCIAL SITUATIONS-- WE WERE
VERY SOCIAL IN THE '60s--
AND IN SOCIAL SITUATIONS
IT SEEMS LIKE THEY HAD A KIND
OF CONNECTION AND CAMARADERIE
THAT I COULDN'T BREAK INTO.
ACTUALLY, THEY WERE
ON ANOTHER PLANET AND I...
SPEAKING ANOTHER LANGUAGE, AND I
REALLY COULDN'T BREAK INTO THAT.
I WAS SOMEWHAT ALIENATED,
AND I...
I THRASHED AROUND FOR A WHILE
BUT EVENTUALLY IT WAS OFFERED
TO ME AND I TRIED IT, AND...
AND WE WERE SNORTING THEN,
AND THEN I WAS...
I WENT FOR THE IDEA
THAT IF YOU INHALE IT
RATHER THAN INJECT IT
YOU'RE NOT GOING
TO GET HOOKED ON IT.
I WANTED TO BELIEVE THAT.
I STARTED USING WHEN I WAS 19.
I MAINLINED, UH... COCAINE...
UH, SPEED ACTUALLY
THEN IT WAS COCAINE
THEN IT DIDN'T EVEN MATTER,
YOU KNOW, THEN HEROIN.
AND I FOUND A WAY
OF GETTING OUTSIDE MYSELF.
Woman:
I WOULD WAKE UP IN THE MORNING
AND ROLL OVER AND OPEN
MY TOP DRESSER DRAWER
AND GET THE COCAINE MIRROR OUT
AND SNORT SOME COCAINE
TO GET STARTED.
AND THROUGHOUT
THE COURSE OF A DAY...
TAKE ANOTHER HIT
WHENEVER I FELT I NEEDED IT--
WHENEVER I WAS...
COMING DOWN TOO FAR.
YOU DON'T KNOW
YOU'RE FALLING IN LOVE WITH IT.
YOU DON'T KNOW THAT IT'S
BEGINNING TO TAKE A PRIORITY
EXCEPT FOR ONE DAY YOU WAKE UP
AND YOU KNOW YOU GOT TO HAVE IT.
YOU GOT TO HAVE IT.
I LOVE HOW I FEEL
AFTER THREE OR FOUR BEERS.
I MEAN, IT'S
AN ECSTATIC FEELING.
AND I THINK... AND THAT...
I SORT OF GREW INTO THAT.
I MEAN, IT WAS...
I THINK IF THERE IS
A GENETIC DIFFERENCE
BETWEEN AN ALCOHOLIC
AND A NONALCOHOLIC
I THINK A NONALCOHOLIC
WHO'S HAD THREE BEERS
WILL FEEL PLEASANT AND RELAXED.
WHEREAS I FELT ECSTATIC,
I JUST FELT TRULY ECSTATIC.
IT'S A EUPHORIC, YOU KNOW,
IT... ALL PROBLEMS DISAPPEAR
AND YOU JUST...
YOU FEEL VERY PHYSICALLY GOOD.
YOU FEEL AS THOUGH YOUR...
YOUR THINKING ABILITY
IS HEIGHTENED SOMEWHAT
THOUGH OFTENTIMES IT'S NOT.
IT WAS JUST
A GENERAL FEELING OF WELL-BEING.
I SOON WAS, YOU KNOW,
IN A VERY GLAMOROUS WORLD.
I WAS SELLING TO CELEBRITIES.
I WAS GETTING
BEHIND THE VELVET ROPES
AT THE EXCLUSIVE
NIGHTCLUBS OF THE '80s.
I WAS SELLING ON WALL STREET,
ON FIFTH AVENUE, AT COLUMBIA.
YOU WEREN'T
SELLING
TO THE DOWN-AND-OUT
ON THE STREET.
YOU WERE
SELLING TO...
IT WAS WHAT YOU WOULD CALL
"NICE MIDDLE-CLASS PEOPLE."
ONCE YOU DECIDE YOU'D LIKE
TO HAVE SOME OR DO SOME
THEN YOU HAVE TO GET IT.
AND WHEN YOU KNOW
YOU HAVE TO GET IT
THEN YOU MAKE WHATEVER CONTACT
YOU HAVE TO MAKE TO GET IT
BUT OFTENTIMES IN THESE
RECREATIONAL DRUG THINGS
YOU DON'T GET IT RIGHT AWAY.
THE PERSON
YOU CAN GET IT FROM SAYS
"WELL, I HAVE TO CALL SO-AND-SO
AND I'LL LET YOU KNOW,"
ET CETERA, ET CETERA.
YOU'RE WAITING FOR IT TO HAPPEN
AND YOU BECOME MORE
DESIRING OF IT, YOU CAN'T WAIT.
IT TAKES OVER YOUR MIND.
YOU'RE NOT EVEN THINKING
ABOUT WHAT WILL HAPPEN
WHEN YOU GET IT
AND HOW YOU'LL FEEL.
YOU'RE JUST THINKING
ABOUT GETTING IT:
"I GOT TO HAVE IT,
I GOT TO HAVE IT!"
DURING A DRINKING SESSION...
ALL RIGHT, IF YOU WERE TO BRING
IN A TRAY OF ECLAIRS RIGHT NOW--
I'M QUITE FOND
OF CHOCOLATE ECLAIRS--
AND SAID, "WE'VE GOT LOTS
OF THEM, DAN, HELP YOURSELF.
HAVE AS MANY AS YOU WANT."
I'D CERTAINLY HAVE
AT LEAST TWO ECLAIRS.
I MIGHT EVEN HAVE THREE OR FOUR.
I LIKE ECLAIRS,
BUT I WOULD GET TO A POINT
WHERE I DON'T WANT
ANOTHER CHOCOLATE ECLAIR.
I'VE HAD ENOUGH, THANK YOU.
WHEREAS THAT DOESN'T HAPPEN
WHEN YOU'RE DRINKING.
THAT DOESN'T HAPPEN.
I COULD BE BOMBED OUT OF
MY SKULL AND I HAVE TO CONTINUE.
AND THEN, OF COURSE, YOU WAKE UP
WITH A HANGOVER THE NEXT DAY
AND THE ONLY CURE FOR A HANGOVER
THAT REALLY WORKS IS ALCOHOL
AND SO THAT, YOU KNOW,
THE CYCLE CONTINUES.
EVEN THOUGH IN THE MORNING YOU
SAY, "I'M NOT GOING TO DRINK"
THEN YOU SEEM TO HIT IT
LIKE A BLIND SPOT IN YOUR BRAIN
WHERE YOU GO ON AUTOMATIC AND
YOU'RE GOING TO HAVE THAT DRINK.
EVERYTHING ELSE SORT OF...
SORT OF FAILS.
YOU'RE GOING TO HAVE THAT DRINK.
YOU HIT... YOU HIT
A BLANK SPOT OR SOMETHING
AND YOU'RE
NOT THINKING ANYMORE:
"WHAT ABOUT THE KIDS, WHAT ABOUT
THE MARRIAGE, WHAT ABOUT...?"
YOU KNOW, "I HAVE TO BE UP
IN THE MORNING AT 6:30."
YOU JUST HIT THIS BLANK SPOT
AND YOU GO TO THE REFRIGERATOR
YOU OPEN IT AND YOU PULL OUT
THAT BOTTLE OF WINE.
I WOULD DO A LOT OF COCAINE
AND I WOULD BE TOO HIGH,
TOO AGITATED, TOO EXCITED.
I'D DRINK A LOT
AND IT WOULD BRING ME
BACK DOWN A LITTLE BIT
TO AN ACCEPTABLE LEVEL.
I'D WANT TO GO
BACK UP THERE AGAIN
AND THOSE ARE THE CYCLES
THAT YOU SEE MINUTE BY MINUTE
IN PEOPLE WHO USE COCAINE
AND ALCOHOL
AND THEY ARE VERY
COMMONLY USED TOGETHER.
IF, FOR SOME VERY STRANGE REASON
YOU WANTED ME
TO HAVE A BEER RIGHT NOW
IT WOULD TAKE AN
ENORMOUS AMOUNT OF PERSUASION.
I DOUBT YOU COULD GET ME
TO HAVE A BEER RIGHT NOW.
BUT IF I WERE TO GIVE IN
I WOULD HAVE THE SECOND BEER
VERY, VERY QUICKLY.
THE CRAVING FOR THE SECOND BEER
IS A LOT DIFFERENT THAN
THE CRAVING FOR THE FIRST.
AND ONCE YOU'VE HAD A SECOND
A THIRD SEEMS LIKE
THE BEST IDEA IN THE WORLD
AND SO ON AND SO ON.
AND THE IDEA OF STOPPING
AT THAT POINT SEEMS ABSURD.
COCAINE IS A VERY TRICKY DRUG
BECAUSE COCAINE
IS NOT SATIATING.
ONE HIT OF COKE MAKES YOU WANT
A HUNDRED HITS OF COKE.
YOU KNOW, ONE HIT OF HEROIN
WILL DO YOU QUITE FINE
FOR FOUR OR SIX HOURS
BUT ONE HIT OF COKE AND
ALL YOU CAN THINK ABOUT IS MORE.
INJECTING DRUGS IS
A VERY, VERY STRONG SENSATION.
IT'S SOMETHING...
IT'S SO STRONG THAT MONTHS
AFTER I HAD STOPPED
I FOUND MYSELF ON OCCASION
WITNESSING SOMEONE INJECT DRUGS
AND I ACTUALLY GOT
THE PHYSICAL TASTE OF THE DRUG
IN THE BACK OF MY THROAT.
JUST THE VISUAL STIMULUS
OF SEEING SOMEONE INJECT DRUGS
WAS ENOUGH TO TRIGGER
THAT KIND OF RESPONSE.
YOU KNOW, IT'S NOT LIKE I WAS
THROWING DOWN MARTINIS EITHER.
I MEAN, I DRANK WHITE WINE,
AND THAT'S, YOU KNOW...
THAT'S WHERE...
I DRANK AN APERITIF WINE FIRST
AND THEN I SWITCHED TO...
CHARDONNAY OR WHATEVER.
AND THE NEXT DAY, I WOULD BE
APPALLED AT HOW MUCH WAS GONE.
THERE WAS LIKE A HALF...
A HALF, UH...
THOSE... THEY HAD
HANDLES ON THEM
LIKE A HALF GALLON
OR WHATEVER THEY ARE.
AND I WOULD BE AMAZED
THE NEXT MORNING
AT HOW MUCH I HAD... CONSUMED.
I WASN'T SO ADDICTED THAT
I WOULDN'T HAVE BEEN ACCEPTED
BY THE AIR FORCE, OBVIOUSLY.
AND THEN I BECAME A FULL-BLOWN
ADDICT IN THE AIR FORCE.
HEROIN?
MORPHINE, MORPHINE.
YEAH, IT WAS AVAILABLE
AT THE BASE IN THOSE DAYS.
THEY'RE IN EVERY FACILITY--
ON ANY BASE,
THERE'S AN EMERGENCY PACK
IN CASE WAR BREAKS OUT.
AND THESE ARE BOUND UP
BY METAL BANDS
SO THAT YOU CAN'T GET IN
UNLESS THERE'S A WAR
AND YOU NEED ALL OF
THAT EMERGENCY MEDICAL SUPPLIES.
SO I HELPED MYSELF TO EVERY
PACKAGE IN EVERY FACILITY
FOR FOUR YEARS.
IN ORDER FOR ME TO SIT HERE AND
HAVE THIS CONVERSATION WITH YOU
I WOULD NEED TO HAVE HAD
A DRINK FIRST
JUST TO CALM ME DOWN,
BECAUSE AFTER A WHILE
PHYSICALLY YOU BEGIN
TO DEPEND ON IT.
SO IF MY MIND...
MY MIND MAY BE TELLING ME
"WENDY, YOU DON'T NEED
TO DRINK."
BUT IF MY HANDS ARE SHAKING
AND IF I'M SWEATING
AND I'VE LEARNED THAT YOU TAKE
A DRINK AND THE SYMPTOMS GO AWAY
YOU KNOW WHAT I MEAN?
SO THAT GRADUALLY...
YOU LEARN THIS STUFF
THAT THIS IS HOW YOU MEDICATE
THE SYMPTOMS OF THIS DISEASE.
I USE "DISEASE" NOW.
BACK THEN, I HAD NO CLUE,
YOU KNOW.
I JUST KNEW THAT IF I TOOK
A DRINK, I WAS ABLE TO MOVE ON.
BUT THEN IT FOOLS YOU
BECAUSE YOU ONLY MEAN TO TAKE
THE ONE, BILL, YOU KNOW.
YOU DON'T...
BUT THEN YOU TAKE THAT ONE,
AND-- BOOM!-- YOU WANT MORE.
HEROIN IS AN INCREDIBLY
GOOD FEELING.
I MEAN, IT'S NOT A COINCIDENCE
THAT PEOPLE USE IT, MISUSE IT
AND ABUSE IT
AND BECOME ADDICTED.
IT'S AN ANALGESIC;
IT'S A PAINKILLER.
AND SO IT ALSO KILLS EMOTIONAL
PAIN AS WELL AS PHYSICAL PAIN.
I REMEMBER IT WAS
NEW YEAR'S DAY 1990
AND IT WAS A HORRIBLE
NEW YEAR'S, HORRIBLE CHRISTMAS
AND I HAD SOME CHEAP CHAMPAGNE
AND SOME FOOTBALL GAME WAS ON.
I DON'T EVEN WATCH FOOTBALL,
BUT I WAS...
I'M ABOUT THREE GLASSES
OF CHAMPAGNE INTO IT--
AND, YOU KNOW, MY LIFE WAS
JUST AWFUL AT THAT POINT.
'89 AND '90, WHICH WAS TOWARD
THE END OF MY DRINKING
WERE BOTH REALLY,
REALLY BAD YEARS.
AND I WAS ON MY THIRD GLASS
OF CHAMPAGNE OR SO
AND I TURNED TO MY FRIEND KEVIN
AND I SAID,
"THIS IS WHY I DRINK.
MY LIFE IS JUST AWFUL RIGHT NOW,
BUT I FEEL GREAT."
AND I DID.
AND I KNEW IT WAS DELUSIONAL,
BUT I WAS JUST HIGH.
IT TOOK ME TO A PLACE WHERE
EVERYTHING FELT JUST FINE.
I CAN STILL FEEL
THE WARM FEELING GOING DOWN
AND EVEN INTO YOUR FINGERS
AND JUST FEELING RELAXED--
YOU KNOW, THAT TERRIBLE INTENSE
TENSENESS WOULD DISSIPATE
AND YOU HAD ONE
OF THOSE EXPERIENCES.
I LIKED THE EFFECTS.
I LIKED IT.
I LIKED IT, WHAT IT DID FOR ME
BECAUSE IT TOOK ME
FROM REALITY
AND PUT ME
WHEREVER I WANTED TO BE.
I BECAME VERY CYNICAL
AND HAD A VERY DEPRESSIVE WAY
OF THINKING
LIKE I SORT OF... YOU KNOW,
THE VULGAR TERM WOULD BE
"LIFE SUCKS AND THEN YOU DIE."
I JUST HAD THIS WAY
OF VIEWING THE WORLD
THAT REALLY MADE ME
VERY UNCOMFORTABLE.
AND I KIND OF FELT THAT
IF LIFE WAS HORRIBLE AND SHORT
AND THEN YOU WERE GOING
TO DIE ANYWAY
WHY NOT HAVE ANESTHESIA?
I CAN CLEARLY REMEMBER MY USING
BECAUSE OF PAIN
AND MY USING BECAUSE I DIDN'T
KNOW WHERE TO GO WITH THE PAIN
OR WHAT TO DO WITH IT
AND MY LOOKING FOR A WAY
TO ESCAPE THE PAIN.
AND IT WASN'T THAT I STARTED OUT
SEEKING PLEASURE.
AND I CAN'T REALLY RECALL IT
BEING PLEASURABLE.
SEE, I THINK THAT A LOT
OF PEOPLE DO DRUGS
BECAUSE IT ADDS DRAMA
TO THEIR LIVES.
IT'S LIKE A SELF-DRAMATIZING
SITUATION
WHERE YOUR LIFE BECOMES MORE
INTERESTING IN YOUR OWN MIND
BECAUSE "I'VE GOT THIS PROBLEM
"AND I DON'T KNOW WHAT
I'M GOING TO DO ABOUT IT
"BUT I'VE GOT TO DO
SOMETHING ABOUT IT
"BECAUSE IF I DON'T DO
I'M GOING TO BE IN TROUBLE."
AND THERE'S A DRAMA.
I NEVER DRANK IN THE MORNING,
I NEVER DRANK AT LUNCH.
MY KIDS NEVER CAME HOME
AND FOUND ME DRUNK.
I DIDN'T DRINK ALL DAY LONG.
I DIDN'T DRINK TILL 6:00
OR 7:00 AT NIGHT.
AND I WOULD SAY...
YOU'D READ ALL THOSE TESTS
IN MAGAZINES, YOU KNOW:
"IF YOU PASS OR FLUNK
SIX OF THESE
THEN YOU'RE AN ALCOHOLIC."
I WOULD TAKE THEM ALL THE TIME.
AND MOST OF THEM SAID,
"DO YOU DRINK IN THE MORNING?"
OR "DO YOU DRINK AT LUNCH?"
AND I DIDN'T
SO I USED THAT FOR A LONG TIME
BUT THE NEXT DAY--
AS MY DRINKING PROGRESSED
THE NEXT DAY,
I WOULD FEEL HORRENDOUS
SO YOU WIND UP...
IT CONTROLLED MY LIFE ANYWAY
BECAUSE I WAS LOOKING AT THE
CLOCK FOR HALF THE AFTERNOON.
I FELT I HAD LOST CONTROL
OVER IT
THAT I COULDN'T MAKE IT
THROUGH THE DAY
WITHOUT SOME COCAINE.
YOU KNOW, THAT WAS
WHAT MY DAY WAS ABOUT
WAS ACQUIRING AND USING COCAINE.
WHEN I CAME BACK
FROM THE AIR FORCE
AND REMEMBER
THAT THE AIR FORCE--
THE MILITARY STRUCTURE
THAT'S OPERANT THERE--
CONTAINED ME FROM ACTING OUT,
FROM BEING OUT OF CONTROL.
IT PROVIDED
EXTERNAL CONTROLS FOR ME
THAT I DIDN'T HAVE INTERNALLY.
LEAVING THAT AND COMING BACK
TO SOCIETY WAS CULTURE SHOCK
AND I DIDN'T NEGOTIATE THAT
CULTURE, THAT SHOCK, VERY WELL.
UH... I BEGAN SELLING DRUGS
ON A WIDE SCALE
IN ORDER TO MAINTAIN MY HABIT.
AND THAT DIDN'T...
I WASN'T SUCCESSFUL FOR LONG
BECAUSE THE DRUG CULTURE, UNLIKE
THE LARGER SOCIETY'S CULTURE
IS A CULTURE WHERE
YOU START OFF AT THE TOP
AND YOU QUICKLY GO
TO THE BOTTOM
WHERE, IN SOCIETY,
YOU START OFF AT THE BOTTOM
AND YOU WORK YOUR WAY UP.
SO I WORKED MY WAY DOWN QUICKLY,
IN LESS THAN A YEAR.
EVERYBODY AROUND ME DRANK,
AND NOBODY ELSE WAS WORKING.
IT WAS THE LIFESTYLE FOR ME.
BUT I GUESS WHEN I STARTED
HAVING BLACKOUTS
WHEN I STARTED HAVING
THOSE EXPERIENCES
WHERE I COULDN'T REMEMBER
HOW I GOT HOME OR WHERE I WAS
OR THINGS LIKE THAT
SOMETHING STARTED GOING OFF
IN ME THAT SOMETHING IS WRONG.
I GOT PRETTY DRUNK
AND RAN OUT IN THE RAIN
IN MY UNDERWEAR--
UNDERWEAR HAPPENED TO BE RED;
THAT FIGURES
INTO THE STORY LATER--
AND WAS JUST SHOUTING,
HOOTING AND HOLLERING
NOTHING BIG,
NOT THAT BIG A DEAL
BUT MY DOWNSTAIRS NEIGHBOR
DIDN'T PARTICULARLY
APPRECIATE IT
AND SHE CALLED THE COPS,
AND THE COPS SHOWED UP
AND I HAD TO SHOW UP
IN COURT THE FOLLOWING WEEK.
AND THE JUDGE IS READING
THE LITTLE DOCUMENT
AND SAYS, "YOU WERE OUTSIDE
IN THE RAIN
IN YOUR... RED UNDERWEAR!"
HE WAS APPARENTLY JUST APPALLED
THAT MY UNDERWEAR WAS RED.
BUT, YOU KNOW, THAT'S A SIGN.
IF THE COPS ARE SHOWING UP,
THAT'S PROBABLY A SIGN.
I THINK THE TIME
IT REALLY HIT HOME WAS
WHEN I HAD BEGUN INJECTING IT
AND I FOUND MYSELF
CRAWLING ON THE FLOOR
SEARCHING THE CARPET FOR
ONE MORE LITTLE ROCK OF COCAINE.
I MEAN, THIS LED ME
THROUGH SOME BOUTS WITH PRISON.
I MEAN, I BECAME A THIEF
IN ORDER TO SUPPORT A HABIT
THAT WAS REALLY EXPENSIVE.
THERE WAS NO JOB YOU CAN HAVE
THAT COULD SUPPORT
A SPEEDBALL HABIT.
I MEAN, YOU EITHER HAVE TO HAVE
OLD WEALTH
OR YOU HAVE TO TAKE MONEY
WHERE IT LIES.
AND SO THIS LED ME TO...
I MEAN, THERE WERE PERIODS
THAT I SPENT ALONE
WHERE I WAS JUST LIVING
ON THE FRINGES OF SOCIETY
IF I WAS LIVING AT ALL.
I LIVED IN A NICE HOUSE,
I HAD A BUNCH OF CARS
MY KIDS WERE IN PRIVATE SCHOOLS,
YOU KNOW, I LOOKED ALL RIGHT.
WHAT WAS THE PROBLEM?
THE PROBLEM WAS I WAS DYING.
YOU KNOW, I WAS DYING.
18 YEARS LATER AND A MARRIAGE
AND AN ABANDONMENT
AND ESTRANGEMENT FROM MY SON
AND A ZILLION OTHER THINGS
ALSO THREE CAREERS--
I'D HAD PERIODS
OF INTERMITTENT ABSTINENCE--
UM... THREE CAREERS
WHERE I JUST WAS ABOUT TO MOVE
OVER THE HUMP, SO TO SPEAK
INTO UNKNOWN TERRITORY
OF SUCCESS
I WOULD ALWAYS FALL
INTO ADDICTION AGAIN.
THEN THERE WAS A POINT--
AND I CAN'T REMEMBER EXACTLY
WHEN IT HAPPENED
I JUST REMEMBER
THAT IT HAPPENED--
THERE WAS A POINT
WHEN I WOULD DO IT EVERY DAY.
I WOULD HAVE IT AND I WOULD
COMPULSIVELY DO IT EVERY DAY
EVEN THOUGH
I DIDN'T REALLY ENJOY IT
WHICH SOUNDS VERY STRANGE
BUT NEVERTHELESS,
THAT'S THE WAY IT WAS.
I USED COCAINE
FOR ABOUT TEN YEARS
NEVER MISSED A WEEKEND
IN TEN YEARS
NEVER MISSED FRIDAY,
SATURDAY AND SUNDAY.
BINGES OF COCAINE USE
FOR TEN YEARS.
WHAT WERE YOU LIKE
IN THOSE BINGES?
VIOLENT.
I MEAN, YOU BEGIN...
THIS BEGINS OVER TIME.
YOU BEGIN GREGARIOUS,
INTERESTING, VERY SOCIAL
AND YOU END UP...
YOU END UP PARANOID,
ANGRY, UH...
ASSAULTIVE, OUT OF CONTROL.
IT'S FUNNY BECAUSE THE MOMENT
I GOT ARRESTED
FOR A VERY BRIEF MOMENT,
I FELT THIS SENSE OF RELIEF
BECAUSE I WAS LIKE
"OH, THE WORST THAT COULD HAPPEN
HAS HAPPENED, IT'S OVER."
AND, YOU KNOW, THEN, YOU KNOW,
BEING IN JAIL WAS TERRIFYING
BUT I HAVE TO SAY,
THE MOMENT I GOT OUT
I WENT BACK TO MY APARTMENT
AND I FOUND SOME DRUGS
THAT I KNEW THE COPS
HADN'T FOUND
AND I KNEW WHERE THEY WERE,
AND I WENT AND I GOT THEM
AND I INJECTED THEM AND...
I MEAN, NOW,
HOW IRRATIONAL CAN YOU GET?
YOU'VE JUST BEEN ARRESTED
FOR THIS STUFF
AND THEN WHAT DO YOU DO,
BUT AS SOON AS YOU GO HOME
YOU DO THIS?
I DIDN'T GO DANCE
ON TOP OF A BAR SOMEWHERE.
YOU KNOW, I DIDN'T GRAB
OTHER PEOPLE'S HUSBANDS.
I DIDN'T DO ANY OF THAT
WHICH SUPPOSEDLY I THOUGHT
WERE THE "HALLMARKS."
YOU KNOW, THIS IS WHAT YOU DID.
I DIDN'T DO ANY OF THAT.
I WAS SO BORING, JUST DAY
AFTER DAY OF FEELING...
LIKE A PIECE OF JUNK.
IT'S A HELL.
IT'S REALLY...
YOUR LIFE BECOMES ABOUT WHERE
AM I GOING TO GET THE NEXT DOSE?
YOU'RE DISCONNECTED
FROM FRIENDS AND FAMILY.
YOUR EMOTIONS ARE DULLED
TO THE POINT OF
ALMOST BEING NONEXISTENT.
THERE'S NO LIFE,
THERE'S NO LIFE.
THERE'S NO SOUL,
THERE'S NO SPIRIT LEFT IN YOU.
I COULDN'T IMAGINE A LIFE
THAT I WOULD BE HAPPY IN.
I COULDN'T IMAGINE LIFE
WORKING OUT IN ANY KIND OF WAY
TO ACCOMMODATE ME.
UM...
YOU KNOW, WHAT I WOULD
LIKE TO DO...
WOULD HAVE LIKED TO DO IF
I COULD IS GET A PLACE TO LIVE
AND GET AN UNLIMITED SUPPLY
OF ALCOHOL
AND JUST CONTINUE
TO DRINK AND DRINK.
THAT WOULD HAVE BEEN FINE
IF THAT HAD BEEN OFFERED TO ME
IF SOME ECCENTRIC
MILLIONAIRE SAID
"ALL RIGHT, IF YOU'D LIKE,
I'LL PROVIDE YOU
"WITH AN APARTMENT AND ENOUGH
FOOD TO KEEP YOURSELF ALIVE
AND ALL THE ALCOHOL YOU WANT."
"THANK YOU," YOU KNOW,
"THAT'S FINE.
THAT'S FINE, I'LL JUST DO THAT."
I WAS IN
A RELATIONSHIP THEN, UH...
WITH A LOVELY WOMAN
WHO I PUT THROUGH MUCH SUFFERING
BECAUSE OF MY ESCALATING
ADDICTION OVER THE YEARS
AND BINGEING
AND SHE WAS BECOMING
BOTH PSYCHOLOGICALLY
AND PHYSICALLY SICK
AND, UH, SHE LEFT ME.
SHE WAS SMART ENOUGH
AND WISE ENOUGH TO LEAVE ME
AND, UH, A WOMAN WHO I CARED FOR
AND LOVED VERY MUCH
AND YET SHE PLAYED A...
SHE PLAYED AN IMPORTANT ROLE.
SHE...
SHE... SHE WOULD...
KEEP ME IN SOME WAYS
ONLY... ONLY ADDICTED
THOSE THURSDAYS, FRIDAYS,
SATURDAYS AND SUNDAYS.
I WOULDN'T GO BEYOND THAT
BECAUSE SHE WOULD
COMPLAIN AND HARASS ME
AND SO THAT WAS
THE EXTERNAL CONTROL
THAT KEPT ME
FROM USING EVEN MORE.
SHE FINALLY ENDED UP LEAVING.
UH, AND EVEN WHEN I LOVED HER
VERY PASSIONATELY
AND WOULD MISS HER
I REMEMBER MY FIRST THOUGHT WAS,
"WHEW, GLAD SHE'S GONE.
"YOU KNOW, NOW I CAN
REALLY STRETCH OUT HERE
AND ENJOY MYSELF."
IT WAS VERY FRIGHTENING
TO DISCOVER
THAT I ACTUALLY HAD
AN ADDICTION
AND STARTED
IMMEDIATELY TRYING TO, UH...
TO WITHDRAW FROM IT
AND GET AWAY FROM IT.
WHAT DID
YOU DO?
I TRIED...
WELL, A COUPLE OF TIMES
I TRIED JUST COLD WITHDRAWAL
WITH SOMEBODY HELPING ME
AND I FOUND BEFORE TOO LONG I
WAS ENTIRELY TOO WEAK FOR THAT.
I JUST DIDN'T HAVE
THE STAMINA AND
THE MORAL CONVICTION FOR THAT.
EVERY SINGLE DAY I WOULD WAKE UP
AND I'D SAY,
"TODAY'S THE DAY I STOP"
AND BY 3:00 OR 4:00
EVERY SINGLE DAY
I KNEW THAT I WOULD, UH...
I KNEW THAT I'D HAVE
TO DRINK THAT NIGHT.
AND THEN I'D SAY, "WELL,
I'M GOING TO STOP AT TWO
OR STOP AT THREE."
AND I WENT TO MASS EVERY MORNING
AND I WOULD PRAY THAT
I COULD STOP AT THREE DRINKS
WHICH IN FACT I DID,
BUT THEY WERE IN VATS.
( Moyers laughs )
I MEAN, MY SITUATION WAS UNUSUAL
IN THAT I WAS A POLICE OFFICER.
I WASN'T, UM, SOMEONE
WHO WAS JUST STRUGGLING
AGAINST AN ADDICTION.
I WAS IN THIS... THIS WORLD
WHERE I WOULD LOSE
MY JOB IMMEDIATELY
AND MIGHT GO TO PRISON IF
I ADMITTED WHAT I WAS DOING.
BUT AT A CERTAIN POINT,
I REALIZED...
IN THE LAST INVESTIGATION
I WAS DOING
THAT... THAT I WAS STRUNG OUT
AND I FEARED THAT MY PARTNER
WAS KILLING HIMSELF.
USING?
YES.
YOU KNEW HE WAS
ADDICTED, TOO?
OH, ABSOLUTELY.
AND YOU
WERE ADDICTED?
YES, AND I WENT TO THE SERGEANT
AND SAID,
"WE'VE GOT DRUG PROBLEMS"
AND THEY PUT HIM IN THE HOSPITAL
FOR A FEW DAYS
AND HE GOT BACK OUT AND
THEY SAID, "GO BUY MORE DRUGS."
THEY WANTED CASES,
THEY WANTED NUMBERS.
THEY DIDN'T CARE
THAT THEIR NARCOTICS OPERATIVES
WERE STRUNG OUT ON DRUGS.
IT DIDN'T MATTER.
I WAS IN A BATTLE FOR MY LIFE
WITH THIS THING
CALLED ALCOHOLISM.
AND...
MY ALCOHOL TOLD ME,
"CUT YOUR FACE."
I WENT TO A MIRROR,
I WAS LIVING IN BROOKLYN
AND I TOOK A RAZOR BLADE
AND I CUT ONE SIDE OF MY FACE.
I CUT THIS SIDE,
AND I STOOD THERE
AND I REMEMBER THIS VIVIDLY.
I WASN'T IN A BLACKOUT.
UM, AND THEN IT TOLD ME,
"CUT THE OTHER SIDE"
SO I DID THAT AS WELL.
I HAD A GUN IN MY POCKET
AND OBVIOUSLY I WAS LOOKING
FOR SOMEONE WHO HAD DRUGS
AND THERE'S NO ONE OUT
AT THAT KIND OF... KIND OF TIME
IN THE MIDDLE OF THE MORNING,
IN THE SOUTH BRONX AGAIN
AND, UH... AND I'M 25.
AND JUST REALIZING,
"I'M GOING TO BE LIKE THIS
"FOR THE REST OF MY LIFE--
THIS IS WHAT I'M
GOING TO BE LIKE."
I'M TALKING ABOUT 1968,
PROBABLY... '67, '68
WHERE THE AXIOM, CLICHE, "ONCE
AN ADDICT, ALWAYS AN ADDICT"
WAS VERY MUCH AN ACCEPTED ONE.
AND THAT'S FRIGHTENING TO THINK
I'M ONLY GOING TO GET WORSE.
I'M GOING TO LOSE ALL MY TEETH,
I'M GOING TO LOSE AN EYE.
I'M GOING TO SUFFER
AND I'M GOING TO BE MISERABLE
WALKING AROUND THE STREETS LIKE
THIS IN THE MIDDLE OF FEBRUARY
ZERO DEGREES, WALKING AROUND
LOOKING FOR SOMEONE TO ROB.
I THINK... THE THOUGHTS WERE,
"I SHOULD KILL MYSELF.
WHY WOULD I WANT TO LIVE
LIKE THIS 20, 30 MORE YEARS?"
I KEPT BUYING DRUGS.
EVENTUALLY, MY PARTNER
AND I WOUND UP GETTING SHOT
AND I LEFT THE DEPARTMENT.
GETTING SHOT WAS, UM...
WAS A FORM OF DEATH
FOR A LONG TIME.
AND I RELIED ON PRESCRIPTION
DRUGS VERY HEAVILY
FOR A LONG TIME AFTER THAT
INSTEAD OF DEALING
WITH THE TERROR.
I WANTED TO DIE.
I REMEMBER THINKING AT POINTS
"I'M JUST GOING TO RAISE THESE
CHILDREN AND THEN I'LL DIE."
AND I THINK, REALLY,
INITIALLY I GOT SOBER
JUST BECAUSE-- I SMOKED
MY HEAD OFF AT THAT POINT--
I WOULD SMOKE IN BED
AND I WAS AFRAID THE HOUSE
WAS GOING TO BURN DOWN
AND I WOULD...
YOU KNOW, THE KIDS
WOULD BE BURNED TO DEATH.
SO I KNEW THAT, UM...
THAT I WANTED... I WANTED...
I LOVE THESE CHILDREN
AND THAT'S WHAT DID IT.
ONE DAY I WAS SITTING
IN MY APARTMENT
AND I RECOGNIZED THAT, UH...
A) I WAS LIVING
IN A FILTHY MESS
THAT, UH, WAS ALMOST
INDESCRIBABLE IN THE STENCH.
IT HAD BLOOD ON THE CEILING,
THERE WERE DIRTY WINE BOTTLES
THERE WERE DIRTY NEEDLES,
THERE WAS DIRTY LAUNDRY.
IT WAS JUST HORRIBLE.
AND I WAS SITTING IN THIS PLACE
AND I WAS BEGGING
A MAN I DESPISED
AND THOUGHT WAS
REALLY STUPID AND UGLY
AND WOULD NEVER IMAGINE
MYSELF SLEEPING WITH
BUT I WAS BEGGING HIM
FOR HEROIN.
AND I JUST...
I JUST KNEW THAT I WAS ABOUT
TO VIOLATE ALL OF MY PRINCIPLES
IN ORDER TO GET DRUGS
AND I KNEW THAT THAT WAS THE
HALLMARK OF AN ADDICT FOR ME.
IT'S THE INSANITY THAT HAPPENS
WHEN YOU'RE IN THE THROES
OF THIS DISEASE.
SOMETIMES WHEN PEOPLE ASK YOU
"WHY DO YOU DRINK, WENDY?"
YOU GET ANGRY
BECAUSE I DIDN'T KNOW.
I, YOU KNOW, I DIDN'T
KNOW MYSELF WHY, UM...
I JUST DIDN'T KNOW.
GOD, I DIDN'T WANT
THOSE THINGS TO HAPPEN.
I DIDN'T WANT TO CUT MYSELF UP.
I DIDN'T WANT
TO JUMP OUT WINDOWS.
TO END UP IN PLACES
WHERE I DIDN'T KNOW
HOW I GOT THERE
WITH PEOPLE WHO
I DON'T KNOW WHO THEY ARE.
I DIDN'T WANT THAT.
I WANTED A LIFE LIKE,
YOU KNOW...
WHEN I CAME OUT OF MY MAMA'S
WOMB, I DIDN'T SAY
"WHEN I GROW UP I WANT TO BE
A DRUNK, I WANT TO BE A TRAMP."
I DIDN'T SAY THAT
AND I DIDN'T WANT THAT, BUT...
THAT'S WHAT HAPPENED.
I WOULD SOMETIMES LOOK AT ALL
THE TIGHT SPOTS I'D BEEN INTO
AND EVERY TIME I WALKED
INTO A HALLWAY OR INTO A BAR
OR WHEREVER TO... TO BUY DRUGS
I COULD'VE DIED RIGHT THERE.
EVERY TIME I MIXED UP
SOME POTION SOMEWHERE
AND INJECTED IT INTO MYSELF,
I COULD'VE DIED RIGHT THERE.
CERTAINLY I'VE BEEN PRESENT
WHEN PEOPLE HAVE, UH,
JUST UNEXPLAINABLY...
YOU KNOW, YOU'RE INJECTING
AN UNKNOWN SUBSTANCE
THAT'S PRODUCED
WITHOUT CONTROLS.
AND OF COURSE THE THINGS
THAT I DID TO GET MONEY--
SOME OF THEM WERE JUST
INCREDIBLE, UNBELIEVABLE.
SOMETIMES IT WOULD MAKE ME
SWEAT AND CRINGE
JUST TO THINK OF SOME OF
THE THINGS THAT I HAD DONE.
I DEFINITELY LOST POWER
OVER MY OWN FACULTIES
AT SOME POINT, YOU KNOW
IN TERMS OF THINGS
THAT I WANTED TO ACCOMPLISH.
SOMEBODY SAID THAT
DREAMS IS... FOR AN ADDICT
IS DRUGS ENDS ALL DREAMS.
YOU KNOW, DEAD ACTUALLY.
AND I FELT A LOT OF MY DREAMS
HAD DIED, YOU KNOW.
WHEN I TESTED IN 1986 FOR H.I.V.
AND PRIMARILY POSSIBLY DUE TO
MY ADDICTION, DUE TO MY USE...
NEEDLES?
UH, I WAS AN INTRAVENOUS
DRUG USER PRIMARILY
AND THEN I BEGAN TO USE
DIFFERENT DRUGS--
EXPERIMENTING WITH DIFFERENT
DRUGS, MIXING DIFFERENT DRUGS.
UM... AND I HAD GOTTEN SICK
AND I WENT TO THE DEPARTMENT
OF HEALTH FOR TESTING
AND I TESTED POSITIVE.
AT THE TIME, I WAS ON HEROIN
AND SO I DIDN'T REALLY
FEEL THE RESULT.
I PROBABLY GOT MYSELF ARRESTED.
I GOT MYSELF ARRESTED.
I'M SAYING ON SOME LEVEL
I THINK THAT IT WAS A CHOICE
AND, UH... AND SOME
WISE JUDGE GAVE ME...
GAVE ME OPTIONS:
GO TO JAIL OR GO TO TREATMENT.
AND YOU CHOSE?
AND I CHOSE TREATMENT.
MY ROOMMATES HAD A BOTTLE
OF CHAMPAGNE IN THE FRIDGE
AND I RAN OUT OF MY ALCOHOL
SUPPLY AND I'M, LIKE
"I GOT TO BUY
THAT CHAMPAGNE OFF YOU.
YOU GUYS GOT TO SELL
THAT CHAMPAGNE OFF YOU."
AND MY ROOMMATE SAID, "YOU'RE
GOING TO HAVE TO STOP SOMETIME."
AND HE WAS ABSOLUTELY RIGHT.
YOU DON'T THINK IN THOSE TERMS
BUT EVENTUALLY THIS BINGE
WOULD HAVE TO COME TO AN END.
AND, UH... I DECIDED
TO END IT FOR GOOD THEN.
THAT WAS... ENDED UP BEING
THE LAST DRINK I HAD.
ON YOUR OWN?
YOU JUST
STOPPED?
OH, I CHECKED INTO A MENTAL
HEALTH FACILITY THE NEXT DAY.
Wendy:
HER NAME IS GENEVA S.
I USED TO DRINK WITH HER
AND, UH, RUN UP AND DOWN
THE STREET WITH HER.
AND I NOTICED FOR TWO YEARS I
NEVER SAW HER ANYMORE TOO MUCH.
YOU KNOW, SHE JUST KIND OF...
I MEAN, I USED TO WATCH
THIS WOMAN HALLUCINATE
UP AND DOWN THE STREET.
BUT ALL OF A SUDDEN
SHE WAS GONE, AND...
COME TO FIND OUT, SHE HAD WENT
INTO ALCOHOLICS ANONYMOUS
HAD BEEN IN ALCOHOLICS ANONYMOUS
FOR THE PAST TWO YEARS.
A.A.?
YEAH.
I REMEMBER HER COMING TO...
I WAS WORKING IN
A GROCERY STORE THEN.
AND I REMEMBER HER
COMING IN THE GROCERY STORE
AND BY NOW I HAD HEARD THAT,
YOU KNOW, SHE'S AN ALCOHOLIC.
WELL, I WAS 26 YEARS OLD
AT THE TIME
SO OF COURSE, I DIDN'T
SEE MYSELF AS AN ALCOHOLIC.
I WAS MUCH TOO YOUNG FOR THAT.
I MEAN, TO BE AN ALCOHOLIC, YOU
HAD TO DRINK A LONG, LONG TIME.
THAT WAS WHAT I THOUGHT.
SO I REMEMBER WHEN SHE
CAME UP TO THE COUNTER.
I WAS BEING FACETIOUS
IN MY OWN NASTY WAY
AND I SAID, "GENEVA, DO
YOU THINK I'M AN ALCOHOLIC?"
YOU KNOW,
NOT REALLY SERIOUS ABOUT IT.
AND SHE LOOKED AT ME, AND SHE
WAS VERY SERIOUS AND SHE SAID
"WENDY, I CAN'T CALL
YOU AN ALCOHOLIC.
ONLY YOU CAN DO THAT."
I SAID, "WELL, YOU KNOW,
I'M 26, SO..."
AND I DIDN'T GIVE IT
ANOTHER THOUGHT, UM...
UNTIL ONE DAY
GOD...
I DIDN'T HAVE ANY MONEY, OKAY
AND I FIGURED, YOU KNOW,
IF I GO DOWN TO GENEVA'S HOUSE
AND TELL GENEVA I NEED TWO
DOLLARS TO GET ME A BOTTLE
BECAUSE I'M GOING
TO TELL HER I'M AN ALCOHOLIC.
SO I GET DOWN THERE AND
OF COURSE GENEVA'S ON HER...
SHE WAS VERY ACTIVE
IN THE PROGRAM
SO SHE WAS ON HER WAY
TO AN INSTITUTIONS MEETING.
AND I NEVER FORGET IT.
I HAD A BANDANNA AROUND MY HEAD,
BECAUSE, SEE, IN MY ADDICTION
ME AND SOAP AND WATER
WEREN'T FRIENDS AT ALL.
I HAD NO TIME FOR THAT.
I REALLY HAD NO TIME FOR IT.
UM, SO I HAD ON
A BANDANNA ON MY HEAD
AND I HAD ON A PAIR OF
ORANGE SHORTS THAT WAS...
I DON'T KNOW IF
I CAN USE THIS WORD
BUT THEY WERE VERY FUNKY,
OKAY, BECAUSE...
FUNKY?
VERY FUNKY.
SO SHE ASKED ME IF I
WANTED TO GO WITH HER
TO THIS INSTITUTION MEETING
AND I'M STILL GOT
IN THE BACK OF MY MIND
I WANT TO GET THESE TWO DOLLARS
SO YEAH, I'M GOING
TO FOLLOW HER WHEREVER.
SO... YOU KNOW, I THOUGHT SHE
WAS GOING IN A CAR OR SOMETHING
BUT SHE TOOK...
SHE WENT ON A PUBLIC BUS.
A PUBLIC BUS.
AND I SAID, "WELL, YOU KNOW
"SHE'S PROBABLY GOING TO
SIT WAY AT THE OTHER END
AND LET ME BE WAY UP HERE,"
BECAUSE I WAS HORRIBLE.
BUT SHE DIDN'T, BILL.
YOU KNOW WHAT SHE DID?
SHE SAT DOWN NEXT TO ME.
YOU KNOW, SHE REALLY SAT DOWN.
AND I WAS LOOKING LIKE THAT.
AND SHE TALKED TO ME.
YOU KNOW, EVERYBODY ON THE BUS
KNEW THAT SHE WAS TALKING TO ME.
WHAT WAS
SHE SAYING?
ABOUT THE PROGRAM, AND...
ABOUT A.A.?
UH-HUH.
I MEAN, ALL
THESE YEARS LATER
YOU STILL
REMEMBER THAT.
IT MUST HAVE
BEEN SOMETHING.
BILL, IT WAS THE FIRST TIME...
YOU KNOW, YOU...
I GUESS YOU WOULD HAVE TO
HAVE SEEN ME AND SMELLED ME
TO UNDERSTOOD--
TO HAVE SOMEBODY ACKNOWLEDGE
THAT THEY KNOW YOU
ON A PUBLIC BUS,
WITH PEOPLE AROUND, LOOKING.
NOBODY...
HAD DONE THAT
IN A LONG TIME FOR ME.
WHEN PEOPLE START TREATMENT,
THEY LOOK LIKE HELL.
THEY LOOK LIKE A BUNCH OF DICK
TRACY VILLAINS OR SOMETHING.
I MEAN, EVERYBODY LOOKS GHASTLY.
AND JUST A FEW WEEKS LATER,
THEY START LOOKING PRETTY GOOD.
AND THAT'S... THAT'S SOMETHING
YOU SEE RIGHT ON THE SURFACE.
PEOPLE... YOU SEE
A VERY DRAMATIC...
THAT'S ONE THING
THAT I DO LIKE ABOUT A.A.
YOU SEE SOME POOR BASTARD
COME IN, YOU KNOW, SHAKING
AND "IT'S MY FIRST MEETING"
AND THEY LOOK AWFUL.
AND YOU MAY SEE THEM TWO MONTHS
LATER AND... LOOKS PRETTY GOOD.
I WAS IN THE DETOX
FOR SEVEN DAYS.
UM... IT WAS NOT FUN.
YOU FEEL LIKE... SO VULNERABLE
AND SO UNCOMFORTABLE
AND YOU HAVE THIS DREADFUL FEAR
THAT YOUR SOURCE OF COMFORT IS
GOING TO BE FOREVER TAKEN AWAY.
SO IT'S NOT SO MUCH THE VOMITING
AND THE SHAKING AND THE PUKING
AND THE DIARRHEA THAT GETS YOU
BUT JUST THE MENTAL ANGUISH
AND THE INSOMNIA
AND THE SENSE THAT...
YOU'RE NEVER GOING TO BE
COMFORTABLE IN THE WORLD.
IT TOOK SOME TIME BEFORE
IT SUNK IN THAT, YOU KNOW
I HAVE THIS RESULT,
THIS DIAGNOSIS
AND WHAT AM I GOING
TO DO WITH THAT?
UM...
THAT WAS AN AWAKENING.
I THINK THERE WAS A NUMBER
OF AWAKENINGS THAT, UH...
JOLTED ME TO, LIKE,
SOME TYPE OF PERSONAL ACTION
SOME TYPE OF HOPE, PERHAPS
SOME TYPE OF... MAKE THIS NEXT
DETOX, GO TO THIS NEXT PROGRAM
THAT JUST DIDN'T
HAVE ME JUST LAY DOWN.
I THINK THAT HAPPENED
FOR ME IN, UM... IN 1989
WHEN I CAME OUT OF MY LAST DETOX
AND I WENT TO A SOUP LINE,
BECAUSE I CAME OUT OF THE DETOX
I WAS LIVING IN AN ABANDONED
BUILDING IN HARLEM
AND I WONDERED,
"WELL, I'M NOT GOING BACK
"TO THE ABANDONED BUILDING.
"WHERE AM I GOING?
WELL, I'M HUNGRY--
LET'S GO TO A SOUP LINE."
SO I WENT TO
AN EAST HARLEM SHELTER
AND FOUND MORE THAN JUST SOUP.
I WENT IN AND GOT A CHANGE
OF UNDERWEAR AND A CLEAN SHIRT
AND... A PLACE TO BE STILL
AND SAFE FOR A WHILE
UH, TO DEVELOP
SOME REGULAR REGIMEN
OF GETTING UP AND DOING WORK
AND EATING REGULAR MEALS
AND SPENDING TIME PAYING
ATTENTION TO OTHER PEOPLE.
I WALKED INTO
THIS THERAPEUTIC COMMUNITY
AND PEOPLE OPENED
THEIR ARMS TO ME.
WHEN I SIT DOWN WITH A GROUP
OF MEN AND WOMEN
WHO BEGIN TO TALK ABOUT
"I'VE BEEN AFRAID ALL MY LIFE";
UH, "I'VE BEEN ANGRY WITH
MY MOTHER FOR A LOT OF YEARS";
UH, "I WAS RAPED
BY MY STEPFATHER"--
YOU KNOW, THESE... THESE
HURTFUL, PAINFUL THINGS
THAT PEOPLE HIDE--
WHEN YOU BEGIN TO TALK ABOUT IT
AND EVERYBODY IN THE GROUP SAYS,
"HAPPENED TO ME," YOU KNOW
ALL OF A SUDDEN,
YOU'RE NOT IN THIS ALONE
AND THAT'S VERY POWERFUL TO FEEL
THAT YOU'RE NOT IN THIS ALONE.
I CAN'T EXPECT YOU
TO KNOW HOW I FELT.
BUT HAD YOU BEEN AN ADDICT
OR, UH, YOU WOULD INSTANTLY KNOW
WHAT I TALK... WHAT I MEANT
WHEN I SAID I WAS TRASH.
YOU KNOW, I WASN'T.
MAYBE I BEHAVED LIKE IT,
BUT I WASN'T.
BUT SOMEONE ELSE
THAT HAD BEEN... BEEN THERE
WOULD SAY INSTANTLY,
"I KNOW WHAT YOU'RE SAYING."
IT'S LIKE A.A., OR N.A.,
OR GAMBLERS ANONYMOUS
OR ANYTHING WHERE PEOPLE
ARE COMING TOGETHER.
I THINK IT ALSO HAPPENS
LIKE WITH...
WHEN THERE'S AN EARTHQUAKE
OR A NATIONAL DISASTER
AND PEOPLE JUST FORGET ABOUT
THEIR STATUS IN LIFE
STRATA IN LIFE, AND THEY JUST
BEGIN DIGGING PEOPLE OUT.
FOR FOREVER, I'D BEEN FEELING
THAT I HAVE NO CHARACTER
I HAVE NO WILLPOWER,
UH, THAT I'M A BAD PERSON--
ALL OF THOSE THINGS THAT SOCIETY
AND ONE PLACES ON THEMSELVES
WHEN YOU DON'T
UNDERSTAND ADDICTION.
AND THEN TO REALIZE
THAT IT HAS NOTHING TO DO
WITH ANY OF THOSE THINGS.
IT HAS TO DO WITH
A GENETIC PREDISPOSITION
THAT IF I DON'T PICK UP
THAT DRINK, I'M OKAY.
IT HELPED ME ENORMOUSLY
TO THINK THAT I HAD A DISEASE
THAT IT WASN'T JUST
A MORAL... FAILURE ON MY PART.
MY MIND NEEDED TRAINING.
IT REALLY DID.
IT WAS A WEAK MUSCLE
OR WHATEVER.
AN ADDICTED
MUSCLE.
YES, IT WAS AN ADDICTED MUSCLE.
EXACTLY.
AND IT TAKES A LOT OF WORK TO...
TO, UM... MAKE IT A STRONG ONE.
WHAT MADE IT
SO HARD TO STAY OFF?
OH, WELL, ONE REASON IS THAT
BY THE TIME YOU WANT TO QUIT
YOU'VE REALLY MESSED UP
YOUR LIFE.
THAT'S JUST THE WAY IT IS.
IT'S, YOU KNOW...
IT ALWAYS WORKS OUT THAT WAY.
VERY FEW PEOPLE GO
INTO AN A.A. MEETING SAYING
"THINGS ARE GREAT, BUT I FIGURE,
YOU KNOW, THEY MIGHT GET BAD."
YOU KNOW, YOU'VE REALLY
MESSED UP YOUR LIFE.
IT TOOK ME... IT TOOK ME A WHILE
TO DEVELOP THE WILLPOWER
DEVELOP THE WILLPOWER OR...
OR... RECOGNIZE THAT THIS...
IF I SNORTED THIS COCAINE
IT WAS NOT GOING
TO MAKE ME HAPPY
TO MAKE ME FEEL GOOD.
IT WAS GOING
TO MAKE ME MISERABLE
AND IT WAS MOST LIKELY GOING
TO START ME ON... ON A RUN
OF JUST DOING MORE COCAINE.
IT WAS... I REMEMBER ONCE
I WAS TALKING TO A THERAPIST
ABOUT A PROBLEM I WAS HAVING
AND IT HAD NOTHING TO DO WITH
DRUGS OR ANYTHING LIKE THAT.
IT WAS A... IT WAS
A PERSONAL PROBLEM
PROBABLY A RELATIONSHIP
OR SOMETHING LIKE THAT
AND I WAS BEING VERY COMPULSIVE
AND OBSESSIVE ABOUT IT
AND I FELT LIKE I COULDN'T STOP
AND SHE SAID TO ME,
"WELL, YOU CAN AND YOU MUST."
AND I SAID, "HOW?"
AND SHE SAID, "THE SAME WAY YOU
TAKE YOUR HAND OFF A HOT STOVE."
AND ACTUALLY THAT'S IT.
IT... YOU JUST STOP.
I WAS SAYING EARLIER HOW EARLY
RECOVERY IS REAL, REAL TOUGH.
THAT'S, UH... IT'S SOMETHING
I REALIZED IS
WHY... WHY DO PEOPLE
ALWAYS RELAPSE?
BECAUSE IT HAPPENS ALL THE TIME.
AND I THINK THE REASON IS,
AS DIFFICULT AS DRINKING IS
EARLY RECOVERY IN SOME WAYS
IS EVEN WORSE.
BUT EVENTUALLY
YOU TURN A CORNER.
AND IN MY CASE,
IT WAS ABOUT SEVEN MONTHS.
ABOUT SEVEN MONTHS
INTO MY RECOVERY
I STARTED FEELING BETTER.
I WOUND UP ENLISTING
IN THE AIR FORCE
WHICH I SUPPOSE WAS A...
A FORM OF TREATMENT.
YOU KNOW, GETTING... GETTING UP
AT 5:00 IN THE MORNING
AND RUNNING AND DOING PUSHUPS
AND THAT KIND OF THING
DURING BASIC TRAINING.
I... THAT WAS VERY HELPFUL.
AND, UM... AND I THINK THAT GAVE
ME A BIT OF A... A GRIP.
IT GOT ME BACK INTO
MY OLD PHYSICAL SELF
WHERE... YOU KNOW, I COULD... I
COULD START TO FEEL GOOD AGAIN
FEEL PHYSICALLY GOOD,
BECAUSE THE DRUGS RUN YOU DOWN
YOU KNOW, THEY RUN... RUN
YOUR BODY DOWN TERRIBLY.
I USED TO SMOKE THREE PACKS
OF CIGARETTES A DAY
AND I JUST SMOKED ALL THE TIME.
I SMOKED UNTIL...
I HAD RESPIRATORY PROBLEMS
WHEN I WAS SMOKING
AND I'D COUGH AND HAVE
A HARD TIME BREATHING
AND SO I STOPPED.
AND I ONLY STOPPED
BECAUSE IT WAS... TO ME...
FROM MY POINT OF VIEW,
IT WAS EITHER STOP OR DIE.
AND SO I PREFERRED
THE ALTERNATIVE OF LIVING
AND SO I STOPPED.
I DON'T KNOW WHAT MADE ME WAKE
UP ONE DAY AND SAY, "THIS IS IT.
I CAN'T TAKE ANOTHER
MINUTE OF THIS."
BUT ONCE I GOT GOING
IN RECOVERY
I KNEW THAT I HAD TO PRAY.
I KNEW THAT I HAD TO FIND, UM,
A GOD THAT I COULD BELIEVE IN.
I KNEW THAT I... THAT
I COULDN'T DO IT ON MY OWN.
AND, UM, I... BELIEVE THAT
THERE IS SOME SPIRIT WITHIN ME
THAT IS MY STRENGTH.
THE POWER CAN BE...
WHATEVER YOU WANT IT TO BE
SO LONG AS IT AIN'T YOU.
FOR ME, IT WAS GENEVA.
SHE WAS MY POWER
GREATER THAN ME.
SHE WAS MY GUIDING LIGHT.
THEN IT BECAME MY A.A. MEETING
AND MY PEERS
AND MY SUPPORT IN THERE.
AND EVENTUALLY
WHEN I GOT SOME OF THE SHAME
AND THE GUILT OUT OF MY LIFE
I WAS ABLE TO SAY
MY HIGHER POWER IS GOD.
I MEAN, HOWEVER
A PERSON GETS THIS...
GETS IN TOUCH WITH,
YOU KNOW, THERE'S A CHOICE
AND AN OPTION AND AN ALTERNATIVE
TO ME, THAT SPEAKS TO FREEDOM.
AND THAT, TO ME, IS
WHAT RECOVERY IS ABOUT.
RECOVERY'S ABOUT CHANGE
AND CHANGE IS ABOUT FREEDOM
YOU KNOW, HAVING FREEDOM.
YOU CAN PLAN YOUR DAY.
WHEN YOU'RE DRINKING, YOU
CAN'T... YOUR DAY IS LIMITED.
BANG, AT 6:00, I USED TO THINK
DON'T GET ON THE PHONE
AND DON'T DO WHATEVER.
YOU'RE FREE, I MEAN,
IT'S ENORMOUS FREEDOM.
AND, UM, THERE'S, THERE'S...
YOU ARE SO USED TO HIDING
HIDING HOW MUCH YOU DRINK
THAT BEING HONEST,
FIRST OF ALL WITH MYSELF--
I WAS TRYING TO KID MYSELF
ALL OF THE TIME.
AND I DON'T HAVE SECRETS.
I DON'T EVER HAVE
TO BE A PHONY AGAIN.
I DON'T HAVE TO WEAR MASKS.
I, YOU KNOW... THIS IS WHO I AM.
I REMEMBER SITTING
IN THE BATHTUB IN THE REHAB
AND WHEN I STEPPED OUT
OF THE BATHTUB
I... MY BODY FELT COMFORTABLE
AND I JUST FELT WARM
AND NICE AND SAFE
AND I THOUGHT, "I CAN DO THIS."
I THOUGHT,
"THERE IS PLEASURE HERE."
I ALSO REMEMBER SWIMMING IN
THE SWIMMING POOL IN THE REHAB
AND AGAIN FEELING LIKE, "AH!
THERE IS SOME OTHER JOY
OTHER THAN DRUGS."
I PLAN TO LIVE
A RIDICULOUSLY LONG TIME.
ANOTHER HUNDRED YEARS--
LET'S SEE IF I SUCCEED--
BUT I PLAN TO BE ONE OF THESE
PEOPLE WHO LIVES JUST FOREVER.
AND I DON'T THINK OF MYSELF AS
NOT DRINKING DURING THAT TIME.
I MEAN, I... IT'S RIDICULOUS
FOR ME TO IMAGINE QUITTING
YOU KNOW, TEN YEARS FROM NOW.
I DON'T KNOW WHAT I'M GOING
TO DO A WEEK FROM NOW.
BUT TODAY, NOT DRINK?
PIECE OF CAKE.
AS YOU AND I ARE SITTING HERE
DOING THIS INTERVIEW
I'M SOBER, SEE.
I WANT TO BE SOBER
RIGHT AT THIS MOMENT
BUT I HAVE A DISEASE
THAT CAN TRICK ME
WHEN I GET UP FROM THIS CHAIR
AND TELL ME THAT
I DON'T WANT TO BE SOBER.
BUT I CAN MAKE A COMMITMENT
TO YOU, BILL, OR TO ANYONE
THAT I... I CAN'T
MAKE A COMMITMENT
THAT I CAN STAY SOBER
THE REST OF MY LIFE.
THAT'S JUST TOO LONG FOR ME.
EVEN AFTER WORKING
ON 14 YEARS OF RECOVERY
THE REST OF MY LIFE IS TOO LONG.
I CAN MAKE A COMMITMENT THAT
I WANT TO STAY SOBER THIS DAY.
I HAVE TO SAY TO MYSELF
I AM THE ONLY PERSON
I CAN DEPEND ON--
NOT THAT I CAN'T DEPEND
ON OTHERS, BECAUSE I CAN--
BUT I AM REALLY THE ONLY
PERSON I CAN DEPEND ON
AND I AM REALLY RESPONSIBLE
FOR MYSELF
AND I AM THE ONLY ONE WHO WILL
HAVE TO PAY THE PRICE.
AND SO I HAVE TO CONSTANTLY
TAKE MYSELF IN... IN... IN REIN
BECAUSE I DON'T, UM...
I'M... I AM LED INTO
TEMPTATION ALL THE TIME
AND THAT'S JUST THE WAY IT IS.
WHAT'S BEEN
THE HARDEST THING
ABOUT STAYING
CLEAN?
IT'S NOT... IT'S NOT
SO HARD ANYMORE.
IT'S... UM... MAYBE
I'VE JUST GROWN UP, YOU KNOW.
MAYBE IT'S HAVING CHILDREN
AND A FAMILY THAT'S PART OF THAT
PART OF UNDERSTANDING THAT,
UM... THAT'S NO...
THAT THAT'S NO WAY TO LIVE,
IT'S... THERE'S TOO MUCH...
THERE ARE TOO MANY
WONDERFUL THINGS IN LIFE
TO... TO ALLOW YOUR FOCUS
TO DIMINISH TO THE POINT
OF CRAWLING ON THE FLOOR
AND LOOKING FOR ONE MORE HIT.
WANT TO KNOW MORE?
CHECK OUT YOUR SOURCE
CLOSE TO HOME: WWW.PBS.ORG
FOR IN-DEPTH INFO, RESOURCES
AND A MULTIMEDIA
COMIC BOOK FOR TEENS.
JOIN US ON THE WEB.
NEXT ON CLOSE TO HOME:
Man:
NICE-LOOKING BRAIN.
"THE HIJACKED BRAIN."
I REALIZED NO MATTER HOW MUCH
I WANTED TO QUIT I COULDN'T.
SCIENCE IS UNRAVELING THE
MYSTERY OF THE ADDICTED MIND.
THEY DON'T KNOW
WHY THEY DON'T JUST STOP.
NEW TECHNOLOGIES SHOW US WHERE
DRUGS AND ALCOHOL TAKE HOLD.
Man:
WE'RE GETTING A MAP
OF HER FEELINGS.
WE'RE GETTING A MAP OF DESIRE
IN THE BRAIN.
AND OFFER HOPE OF NEW TREATMENT
AND A TRANSFORMATION
IN ATTITUDE.
YOU'VE GOT TO DEAL WITH IT
AS AN ILLNESS.
"THE HIJACKED BRAIN"
ON THE NEXT CLOSE TO HOME.
[Captioned by
The Caption Center
WGBH Educational Foundation]
FUNDING FOR THIS SERIES
IS PROVIDED BY:
MAKING GRANTS TO IMPROVE
THE HEALTH AND HEALTH CARE
OF ALL AMERICANS.
AND BY:
BUILDING AMERICA'S FUTURE
THROUGH PENSION
AND RETIREMENT PLANS
ENCOURAGING DIALOGUE
AND DISCUSSION.
AND YOU WOULD LIKE
MORE INFORMATION
CALL 1-800-729-6686.
YOU CAN GET INFORMATION
ABOUT SUBSTANCE-ABUSE ISSUES
OR FIND TREATMENT OPTIONS
IN YOUR COMMUNITY.